## Using Threads to Run Code Simultaneously

In most current operating systems, an executed program’s code is run in a process, and the operating system will manage multiple processes at once.

Within a program, you can also have independent parts that run simultaneously.

The features that run these independent parts are called threads.

For example, a web server could have multiple threads so that it could respond to more than one request at the same time.



Splitting the computation in your program into multiple threads to run multiple tasks at the same time can improve performance, but it also adds complexity.

Because threads can run simultaneously, there’s no inherent guarantee about the order in which parts of your code on different threads will run.

This can lead to problems, such as:

- Race conditions, where threads are accessing data or resources in an inconsistent order
- Deadlocks, where two threads are waiting for each other, preventing both threads from continuing
- Bugs that happen only in certain situations and are hard to reproduce and fix reliably

Rust attempts to mitigate the negative effects of using threads, but programming in a multithreaded context still takes careful thought and requires a code structure that is different from that in programs running in a single thread.



Programming languages implement threads in a few different ways, and many operating systems provide an API the language can call for creating new threads.

The Rust standard library uses a 1:1 model of thread implementation, whereby a program uses one operating system thread per one language thread.

There are crates that implement other models of threading that make different tradeoffs to the 1:1 model.



## Creating a New Thread with spawn

To create a new thread, we call the `thread::spawn` function and pass it a closure (we talked about closures in Chapter 13) containing the code we want to run in the new thread.

The example in Listing 16-1 prints some text from a main thread and other text from a new thread:

Filename: src/main.rs

```rust
use std::thread;
use std::time::Duration;

fn main() {
    thread::spawn(|| {
        for i in 1..10 {
            println!("hi number {} from the spawned thread!", i);
            thread::sleep(Duration::from_millis(1));
        }
    });

    for i in 1..5 {
        println!("hi number {} from the main thread!", i);
        thread::sleep(Duration::from_millis(1));
    }
}
```

Listing 16-1: Creating a new thread to print one thing while the main thread prints something else

Note that when the main thread of a Rust program completes, all spawned threads are shut down, whether or not they have finished running.

The output from this program might be a little different every time, but it will look similar to the following:

```rust
hi number 1 from the main thread!
hi number 1 from the spawned thread!
hi number 2 from the main thread!
hi number 2 from the spawned thread!
hi number 3 from the main thread!
hi number 3 from the spawned thread!
hi number 4 from the main thread!
hi number 4 from the spawned thread!
hi number 5 from the spawned thread!
```

The calls to `thread::sleep` force a thread to stop its execution for a short duration, allowing a different thread to run.

The threads will probably take turns, but that isn’t guaranteed: it depends on how your operating system schedules the threads.

In this run, the main thread printed first, even though the print statement from the spawned thread appears first in the code.

And even though we told the spawned thread to print until `i` is 9, it only got to 5 before the main thread shut down.



If you run this code and only see output from the main thread, or don’t see any overlap, try increasing the numbers in the ranges to create more opportunities for the operating system to switch between the threads.


sub-topic:

[[Waiting for All Threads to Finish Using join Handles]]




Next-topic:

[[16.2. Using Message Passing to Transfer Data Between Threads]]