# All the Places Patterns Can Be Used

Patterns pop up in a number of places in Rust, and you’ve been using them a lot without realizing it! 

This section discusses all the places where patterns are valid.



# match Arms

As discussed in Chapter 6, we use patterns in the arms of `match` expressions.

Formally, match expressions are defined as the keyword `match`, a value to match on, and one or more match arms that consist of a pattern and an expression to run if the value matches that arm’s pattern, like this:

```rs
match VALUE {
    PATTERN => EXPRESSION,
    PATTERN => EXPRESSION,
    PATTERN => EXPRESSION,
}
```

For example, here's the `match` expression from Listing 6-5 that matches on an `Option<i32>` value in the variable `x`:

```rs
match x {
    None => None,
    Some(i) => Some(i + 1),
}
```

The patterns in this `match` expression are the `None` and `Some(i)` on the left of each arrow.



One requirement for `match` expressions is that they need to be exhaustive in the sense that all possibilities for the value in the `match` expression must be accounted for.

One way to ensure you’ve covered every possibility is to have a catchall pattern for the last arm: for example, a variable name matching any value can never fail and thus covers every remaining case.



The particular pattern `_` will match anything, but it never binds to a variable, so it’s often used in the last match arm.

The `_` pattern can be useful when you want to ignore any value not specified, for example.

We’ll cover the `_` pattern in more detail in the “Ignoring Values in a Pattern” section later in this chapter.



[[Conditional if let Expressions]]
